New proposal: Lightweight same-type requirements for primary associated types (#1538)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/nnnn-light-weight-same-type-syntax.md

# Lightweight same-type requirements for primary associated types

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposal-templates/NNNN-filename.md)
* Authors: [Pavel Yaskevich](https://github.com/xedin), [Holly Borla](https://github.com/hborla), [Slava Pestov](https://github.com/slavapestov)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: Implemented on `main` behind the `-enable-parametrized-protocol-types` feature flag; primary associated types are declared with the interim `@_primaryAssociatedType` attribute rather than the proposed syntax.

## Introduction

> As a step toward the goal of improving the UI of generics outlined in [Improving the UI of Generics](https://forums.swift.org/t/improving-the-ui-of-generics/22814#heading--directly-expressing-constraints), this porposal introduces a new syntax for conforming a generic parameter and constraining an associated type via a same-type requirement.

Reviewer: `porposal` → `proposal`

```suggestion
As a step toward the goal of improving the UI of generics outlined in [Improving the UI of Generics](https://forums.swift.org/t/improving-the-ui-of-generics/22814#heading--directly-expressing-constraints), this proposal introduces a new syntax for conforming a generic parameter and constraining an associated type via a same-type requirement.
```

## Source compatibility

This proposal has no impact on existing source compatibility for existing code. For protocols that adopt this feature, removing or changing the primary associated type will be a source breaking change for clients.

## Effect on ABI stability 

This change does not impact ABI stability for existing code. The new feature does not require runtime support and can be backward-deployed to existing Swift runtimes.

## Effect on API resilience

This change does not impact API resilience. For protocols that adopt this feature, adding or removing a primary associated type is a binary-compatible change. Removing a primary associated type is also a binary-compatible change, but is not recommended since it is source-breaking.

## Future Directions

> This proposal works together with the proposal for [Opaque types in parameters](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/pull/1527/files), allowing you to write:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal works together with the proposal for [Opaque Parameter Declarations](0341-opaque-parameters.md), allowing you to write:
```

```swift
func processStrings(_ lines: some Collection<String>)
```

Which is equivalent to:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```swift
```

func processStrings <S : Collection>(_ lines: S)
  where S.Element : String
```

> Actually adopting primary associated types in the standard library is outside of the scope of this porposal. There are the obvious candidates such as `Sequence`, `Collection` and `AsyncSequence`, and no doubt others that will require additional discussion.

Reviewer: `porposal` → `proposal`

```suggestion
Actually adopting primary associated types in the standard library is outside of the scope of this proposal. There are the obvious candidates such as `Sequence`, `Collection` and `AsyncSequence`, and no doubt others that will require additional discussion.
```

  ```

- The inheritance clause of another protocol, for example:

  ```swift
  protocol TextBuffer : Collection<String> { ... }
  
  // Equivalent to:
  protocol TextBuffer : Collection where Element == String { ... }
  ```
  
- The inheritance clause of a generic parameter, for example:

  ```swift
  func sortLines<S : Collection<String>>(_ lines: S) -> S

  // Equivalent to:
  func sortLines<S : Collection>(_ lines: S) -> S
    where S.Element == String
  ```
  
- The inheritance clause of an associated type, for example:

  ```swift
  protocol Document {
    associatedtype Lines : Collection<String>
  }
  
  // Equivalent to:
  protocol Document {
    associatedtype Lines : Collection
      where Lines.Element == String
  }
  ```
  
- The right-hand side of a conformance requirement in a `where` clause, for example:

  ```swift
  func mergeFiles<S : Sequence>(_ files: S)
    where S.Element : AsyncSequence<String>
  
  // Equivalent to:
  func mergeFiles<S : Sequence>(_ files: S)
    where S.Element : AsyncSequence, S.Element.Element == String
  ```

Formally, a conformance requirement `T : P<Arg>` desugars to a pair of requirements:

```swift
T : P

> T.PrimaryType : Arg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
T.PrimaryType == Arg
```

  ...
}
```

The `concatenate()` function shown earlier can now be written like this:

```swift
func concatenate<S : Sequence<String>>(_ lhs: S, _ rhs: S) -> S {
  ...
}
```

## Detailed design

At the protocol declaration, an optional _primary associated types list_ delimited by angle brackets can follow the protocol name. When present, at least one primary associated type must be declared. Multiple primary associated types are separated by commas. Each primary associated type may optionally declare an inheritance clause. The formal grammar is amended as follows, adding an optional **primary-associated-type-list** production to **protocol-declaration**:

- **protocol-declaration** → attributes<sub>opt</sub> access-level-modifier<sub>opt</sub> `protocol` protocol-name primary-associated-type-list<sub>opt</sub> type-inheritance-clause<sub>opt</sub> generic-where-clause<sub>opt</sub> protocol-body
- **primary-associated-type-list** → `<` primary-associated-type | primary-associated-type `,` primary-associated-type-list `>`
- **primary-associated-type** → type-name
- **primary-associated-type** → type-name `:` type-identifier

> - **primary-associated-type** → type-name `:` protocol-composition-type

Reviewer 3: Grammatically, this is identical to a `generic-parameter-list` right? Are we just duplicating this production under a different name to avoid the implication that Swift supports "generic protocols"?

Author: It's slightly different, because primary associated types can have a default just like ordinary associatedtype declarations (but I need to update the pitch to reflect that)

  ```swift
  func transform(_: some Sequence<some Equatable>) -> some Sequence<some Equatable>
  ```

  Note that in the above, the opaque result type `some Sequence<some Equatable>` is unrelated to the opaque _parameter_ type `some Sequence<some Equatable>`. The parameter type is provided by the caller. The opaque result type is a (possibly different) homogeneous sequence of elements, where the element type is known to conform to `some Equatable` but is otherwise opaque to the caller.

### Other positions

There are three more places where constrained protocols may appear:

- In the inheritance clause of a concrete type, for example:

  ```swift
  struct Lines : Collection<String> { ... }
  ```

  In this position it is sugar for specifying the associated type witness, similar to explicitly declaring a typealias:

  ```swift
    struct Lines : Collection {
      typealias Element = String
    }
  ```

- As the underlying type of a typealias:

  ```swift
  typealias SequenceOfInt = Sequence<Int>
  ```
  
  The typealias may be used in any position where the constrained protocol type itself would be used.
  

> - As a member of a protocol composition in any position where a constrained protocol type is itself valid:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- As a member of a protocol composition in any position where an unconstrained protocol type would be valid:
```

Is this what you mean?

> - As a member of a protocol composition in any position where a constrained protocol type is itself valid:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- As a member of a protocol composition, when the protocol composition appears in a position where a constrained protocol type would be valid:
```
